== Jenkins Templating Engine

https://plugins.jenkins.io/templating-engine[image:https://img.shields.io/jenkins/plugin/v/templating-engine.svg[Jenkins
Plugin]]
https://github.com/jenkinsci/templating-engine-plugin/releases/latest[image:https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/jenkinsci/templating-engine-plugin.svg?label=release[GitHub
Release]]
https://plugins.jenkins.io/templating-engine[image:https://img.shields.io/jenkins/plugin/i/templating-engine.svg?color=blue[Jenkins
Plugin Installs]]
https://gitter.im/jenkinsci/templating-engine-plugin[image:https://badges.gitter.im/jenkinsci/templating-engine-plugin.svg[Gitter]]

image:jte.png[image]

https://jenkinsci.github.io/templating-engine-plugin[Full Documentation
Can Be Found Here]

https://jenkins.io/blog/2019/05/09/templating-engine/[Jenkins.io:
Introducing the Jenkins Templating Engine!]

The Jenkins Templating Engine (JTE) is a plugin developed by Booz Allen
Hamilton enabling pipeline templating and governance. JTE allows you to
consolidate pipelines into shareable workflows that define the business
logic of your software delivery processes while allowing for optimal
pipeline code reuse by pulling out tool specific implementations into
library modules.


== How Does It Work?

JTE allows you to separate the business logic of your pipeline (what
should happen, and when) from the technical implementation by creating
pipeline templates and separating the implementation of the pipeline
actions defined in the template out into pipeline libraries.

The idea is that regardless of which specific tools are being used there
are common steps that often take place, such as unit testing, static
code analysis, packaging an artifact, and deploying that artifact to an
application environment.

An example workflow might be:

image:sample_template.png[image]

This workflow could be implemented by creating a template, as follows:

[source,]
----
unit_test()
static_code_analysis()
build()
deploy_to dev 
----

This template could be reused by multiple teams using different tools by
creating `libraries<Library Development>` which implement the pipeline
*steps* `unit_test`, `static_code_analysis`, `build`, and `deploy_to`.
Once these libraries are created, a configuration file is created to
specify which libraries to load.

== Why Templating?

Pipelines are typically defined on a per application basis via a
`Jenkinsfile` in the source code repository. Often, common code can be
pulled out into Shared Libraries to reduce code duplication but a few
problems remain. Organization's application portfolios often have a
diverse technical stack, each requiring their own pipeline-as-code
integrations. It becomes increasingly complex to manage these different
implementations across an organization while standardizing on the
software delivery processes required. Additionally, for organizations
with strict governance requirements around types of security testing and
approvals, having a Jenkinsfile within the source code repository can be
problematic as it potentially allows developers to bypass these
mandatory steps.

image:value.png[image]

=== Organizational Governance

While it is possible to just use JTE to develop cleaner pipelines by
writing a templated Jenkinsfile inside your application's repo alongside
the configuration file, the real power of JTE comes from creating
shareable workflows and using them across teams.

To enable shareable workflows and to consolidate common configurations
between teams, the templates and a parent configuration file can be
defined in a centralized repository. This centralized repository would
act as a `governance tier<Governance Tier>` where configurations are
specified that applications must inherit.

With governance tiers, organizations can create enterprise scale
pipelines that codify the required software delivery processes and
common pipeline configurations that applications will inherit for their
pipeline.

=== Optimize Code Reuse

By separating the implementation of pipeline tool integrations into
common libraries, you're able to share pipeline code effectively across
multiple teams. There is no reason each team writing a pipeline should
spend time developing different versions of the same pipeline code.

At Booz Allen, we have written pipeline libraries focused on creating a
DevSecOps pipeline and automated the deployment of various testing tools
into a Kubernetes environment. We call it the Solutions Delivery
Platform and it's open sourced through the Booz Allen Public License.
Through SDP, we have decreased the time it takes to develop a mature
DevSecOps pipeline from months to days and we're continuously improving
the libraries we've built while incorporating new tool integrations as
they are required across our client engagements.

=== Simplify Pipeline Maintainability

Let's face it: typically pipelines are developed by a core team of DevOps
engineers that are working with multiple development teams
simultaneously. Much of the code is the same and can be pulled into a
traditional Jenkins Shared Library, but having a Jenkinsfile in every
repository is a *pain*.

It makes updating the flow of a pipeline challenging as the Jenkinsfile
must be migrated for every repository. It can be difficult to add new
tool integrations and makes it easier to inadvertently break something
because each pipeline may be a little different.

With JTE, everything becomes much simpler. Making a change to the flow
of the pipeline is just a matter of updating a pipeline template defined
in one location. Individual tool integrations are organized into
libraries that contribute isolated steps.
